# Calculate average bytes per flow per host group
In this exercise, you learn how to calculate the average bytes per flow per host group. 

* Learn how to use the `.groupby()` method of `pandas`. 
* Calculate the mean of a grouped DataFrame
* Use the `.unique()` method of `pandas`

In this use case, the dataset contains three types of host groups: 

* Web Servers
* End User Devices
* Desktops

Let's see what the differences are for each host group in terms of the average bytes per flow. 

## Simplifying the host groups

To calculate the amount of data that was received and sent per host group, you must clean up the dataset. For this exercise, all groups will be stripped except for `Subject Host Groups` and `Peer Host Groups`. 

For example, you may have a list similar to the following example:

`"Subject Host Groups": "Web Servers, End User Devices, Desktops, Atlanta, Sales and Marketing"`

This list is shortened to the following example:

`"Subject Host Groups": "Web Servers"`

> *Note:* Cisco Secure Network Analytics has a powerful engine to track multiple host groups and IP changes. For this exercise we are simplifying the process.

1. Open `pandas_exercise.py` in your editor.

2. To strip off the excess host groups, use the `strip_host_groups(text)` function. Uncomment the following lines in the `main()` function and run the Python script again in your terminal window.

```
    # Hands-on excercise: calculate average bytes per flow per host group
    #TODO df['Subject Host Groups'] =  df['Subject Host Groups'].apply(strip_host_groups)
    #TODO df['Peer Host Groups'] =  df['Peer Host Groups'].apply(strip_host_groups)
```

## Calculating the average bytes per flow per host group

To calculate the average bytes per flow per host group, aggregate the total number of bytes per host group. You can use a built-in function in `pandas` that can group the values in a column and return us aggregates. The function loops through the unique values in the `Subject Host Groups` column and for each unique host group, filters out all its values. The function stores the values in an `aggregates_dict`.

```python
def aggregate_bytes_per_hostgroup_sent_or_received(df, sent_or_received):
    peer_or_subject_bytes = check_sent_or_received(sent_or_received)

    aggregates_dict = {}
    for hostgroup in df['Subject Host Groups'].unique():
        hostgroup_index = df.groupby(by="Subject Host Groups").groups[hostgroup]
        bytes_values = df.iloc[hostgroup_index][peer_or_subject_bytes].values
        aggregates_dict[hostgroup] = bytes_values

    return aggregates_dict
```

> *Note:* The function takes two values, the DataFrame and a string indicating the direction of the flow, either `'sent'` or `'received'`. The function `check_sent_or_received` checks whether the input is either one of the options and if not, it raises an exception. 

In a similar way, you can calculate the average number of bytes per qos-group in either direction. The function loops through the host groups again and groups the values again using the `groupby` function. The function groups by the `Subject Host Groups`, takes the mean of it, and stores the result in a dictionary.
 
In a similar way, you can calculate the average number of bytes per qos-group in either direction. The function loops through the host groups again and groups the values again using the `groupby` function. The function groups by the `Subject Host Groups`, takes the mean of it, and stores the result is in a dictionary. 

```python
def average_bytes_per_hostgroup_sent_or_received(df, sent_or_received):
    peer_or_subject_bytes = check_sent_or_received(sent_or_received)

    averages_dict = {}
    for hostgroup in df['Subject Host Groups'].unique():
        hostgroup_index = df.groupby(by="Subject Host Groups").groups[hostgroup]
        bytes_averages = df.iloc[hostgroup_index][peer_or_subject_bytes].values.mean()
        averages_dict[hostgroup] = bytes_averages
    return averages_dict
```

To try this, open `pandas_exercise.py` in your editor and uncomment the following lines in the main function by deleting the `#TODO `: 

```python
# Hands-on excercise: calculate average bytes per flow per host group
#TODO df['Subject Host Groups'] =  df['Subject Host Groups'].apply(strip_host_groups)
#TODO df['Peer Host Groups'] =  df['Peer Host Groups'].apply(strip_host_groups)

#TODO total_sent = aggregate_bytes_per_hostgroup_sent_or_received(df, 'sent')
#TODO total_received = aggregate_bytes_per_hostgroup_sent_or_received(df, 'received')
#TODO print(average_bytes_per_hostgroup_sent_or_received(df, 'sent'))
#TODO print(average_bytes_per_hostgroup_sent_or_received(df, 'received'))
```

**Next: Detect above-average flows**